In this step, we're going to develop a schedule.
Now the WBS by itself is not a schedule, it is merely a list of tasks.
Okay,
so the project schedule will have a start and end date for each
and every task that you have on the plan,
and when you have some prerequisites for this as well of course.
The WBS, of course, that's the list of all the tasks to complete the project.
Resources assigned, what are all the resources needed?
Now these are usually people of course,
but it could also be tools or other sort of physical artifacts.
We want the estimate for every task, the amount of time,
preferably in hours, I don't really like days,
or weeks, or months, let's get more specific and use hours.
Next, the confidence factor,
this'll help you keep your eye on the task that
you're not quite that confident in,
in either the hours estimate or maybe some other factors.
This'll help you later focus on improving the
elements about this particular task.
And lastly, task relationships or dependencies,
does task A have to be done before say task B?
Now Microsoft Project and other tools are very good at
defining and tracking task dependencies.
Okay, now let's take a look at an example.
Here is our familiar example.
I have removed, by the way,
the Confidence Factor column just to put a little
more space here on the example, but if you,
yourself of course, you would leave that on there as a column.
Okay, so you can see on the right that I've added two more columns on the end,
the Start Date and the End Date for that particular task.
The first one, the Start Date is the date that I believe the work can begin.
It should be on or after the date the resource is available.
Next, the column that I added is the expected completion or End Date,
and here's just an example that I've squared off here,
the start and end date for task 100.
50 is April 14, and I believe it will end on April 28, very easy and simple.
You're doing this, say yourself or with your team,
and you're looking at the different assignments and resources that you have,
and you're laying out the schedule, not that complicated really.
Then at the very bottom in the lower right,
I have the start date and the end date for the entire project.
I just took the earliest start date and the latest end date,
and that basically is my entire range.
Now of course other tools like Microsoft Project may come in
very handy or easier if your project is more complicated with
dependencies that are even larger, but I found for projects maybe 2,
3, 4 people, using a spreadsheet is just very,
very easy to come up with a very quick and actually quite accurate schedule
to share back with your customer or your stakeholders.
Now let me share with you some scheduling tips to help you do your scheduling.
Okay,
I recommend strongly that your scheduling process must
cover all of the work on the project, not just some of it.
A lot of the times things get left off like quality assurance,
or promoting software from DEV to QA to production,
documentation, release notes, it's everything you could possibly think of,
everything you can possibly think of, meetings,
time to write status reports,
etc., to cover everything to get a more accurate estimate.
Also be as realistic as possible, what is reality,
you know the people, you know their strengths.
A lot of times though, you do get a lot of pressure from senior management,
I want this done by a certain date.
You need to have the strength and the integrity to say,
hey, this is what it's really going to take to go do for our team.
Also do a sanity check.
You might think your schedule looks pretty good, but can you really get it done?
Make sure you've talked to the right people on your team,
maybe stakeholders, customers,
or other mentors in your company to make sure that those
estimates and the scheduling dates are realistic.
And also have buy in from the project team.
If someone says there's no way I can do this,
they will feel that way throughout the software development process,
and just won't be as much of a team player,
or won't have as much faith or respect in you as a project manager,
you really want to get the buy in of your team.
And lastly of course, everything must be documented,
communicated to the team on your project,
stakeholders, and I think updated weekly,
in other words, things change, the estimates might get higher,
they might get lower, when the estimates change,
the schedule will change, so I revisit and update my project schedule,
and estimates,
and tasks every single week on every single project to be accurate.
Okay, here's one more element of scheduling that I'd like to cover next.
Now even though our schedule may of looked pretty good on the previous slides,
there's still the issue of what I call resource loading,
this is where I literally want to lay out week by week the schedule
with the resources and using the resource start dates,
and see how it all plays out.
Now again, Microsoft Project will help us do this,
but for less complicated schedules, Excel is just fine.
Now on the left, the first column, I have the Resources column,
so those are the resources identified on the previous slides.
I even included TBD of course because that's a valid resource,
I still have to get a real person or persons to do that,
but I still need some time there to complete the project under TBD.
The next column are the estimated hours,
so I look back on the estimated tasks,
and so all of the hours for MK were 26 hours,
all the hours for JK were 50, etc., so all those hours add up to 411 hours,
that's my entire estimate for this project.
Across the top there, I have the week numbers like April 1,
April 8th, April 15th, etc., so I've laid out all the weeks.
Above that is the week number, I always like to know the week number,
am I in week 1 or week 2, so by laying this out,
I see that I have a 7 week project to actually,
you know, perform the 411 hours required.
Okay, for week 1, April 1, based on the start dates back on the other schedule,
MK is going to put in 6 hours that week.
Now on 4/8, no one was starting yet, so this project has a very slow start.
The next week is 4/15, and I can see several more resources came on board.
MK still had 20 hours, JK, JR, and PS added 20,
40, and 20 hours, so they're starting the project up.
In the next week, I have 40 hours for PS, and I have 40 hours TBD.
The next week some more work is being done.
Again,
I'm determining this all on the tasks before the task
schedule before with those start and end dates,
and then the estimates assigned to that particular task,
and I carried it through to 5/6, and I carried it through to 5/13.
Now one of the rows at the bottom, TOTAL Hrs/Wk, so I just summed up the hours.
So for the first week it's 6 hours, second week 0, third week 100, etc.
And the bottom row is what I call the WKLY CUM hours,
so the first week is 6 hours, second week was 0 so that kept the CUM at 6,
and all the way through, that way on week 7,
I see that I've accumulated 411 hours.
Since the project is 411 hours, now I've laid out this resource chart,
so I can see another visual slice of my schedule and
estimates basically together across time.
This is very, very handy to do a resource load.
Just because someone says they're going to start on a date and end on a date,
well, are you doing that full- time, part-time,
what portion or percent are you actually doing the work,
and now you can see on the very last column,
I have % On Project.
So MK over these 7 weeks is on about 10%,
that'd be on average about 4 hours a week,
and PS is on about 50%, so this gives me a feel of how much of their time I need,
so if they work for me that's great.
If they work for other managers, I could share this with them and say look,
I'm going to need about 20% of your person or of this resource,
50%, etc.
So this resource chart is very, very handy indeed.
Okay,
now let's move on to the next section and talk about project planning elements for project control.